# Sequential p-value computation

`sequentialPValue` computes a sequential p-value for a group sequential
design using a spending function as described in Maurer and Bretz (2013)
and previously defined by Liu and Anderson (2008). It is the minimum of
repeated p-values computed at each analysis (Jennison and Turnbull,
2000). This is particularly useful for multiplicity methods such as the
graphical method for group sequential designs where sequential p-values
for multiple hypotheses can be used as nominal p-values to plug into a
multiplicity graph. A sequential p-value is described as the minimum
alpha level at which a one-sided group sequential bound would be
rejected given interim and final observed results. It is meaningful for
both one-sided designs and designs with non-binding futility bounds
(`test.type` 1, 4, 6), but not for 2-sided designs with binding futility
bounds (`test.type` 2, 3 or 5). Mild restrictions are required on
spending functions used, but these are satisfied for commonly used
spending functions such as the Lan-DeMets spending function
approximating an O'Brien-Fleming bound or a Hwang-Shih-DeCani spending
function; see Maurer and Bretz (2013).

## Usage

``` r
sequentialPValue(
  gsD = gsDesign(),
  n.I = NULL,
  Z = NULL,
  usTime = NULL,
  interval = c(1e-05, 0.9999)
)
```

## Arguments

- gsD:

  Group sequential design generated by `gsDesign` or `gsSurv`.

- n.I:

  Event counts (for time-to-event outcomes) or sample size (for most
  other designs); numeric vector with increasing, positive values with
  at most one value greater than or equal to largest value in `gsD$n.I`;
  NOTE: if NULL, planned n.I will be used (`gsD$n.I`).

- Z:

  Z-value tests corresponding to analyses in `n.I`; positive values
  indicate a positive finding; must have the same length as `n.I`.

- usTime:

  Spending time for upper bound at specified analyses; specify default:
  `NULL` if this is to be based on information fraction; if not `NULL`,
  must have the same length as `n.I`; increasing positive values with at
  most 1 greater than or equal to 1.

- interval:

  Interval for search to derive p-value; Default: `c(1e-05, 0.9999)`.
  Lower end of interval must be \>0 and upper end must be \< 1. The
  primary reason to not use the defaults would likely be if a test were
  vs a Type I error \<0.0001.

## Value

Sequential p-value (single numeric one-sided p-value between 0 and 1).
Note that if the sequential p-value is less than the lower end of the
input interval, the lower of interval will be returned. Similarly, if
the sequential p-value is greater than the upper end of the input
interval, then the upper end of interval is returned.

## Details

Solution is found with a search using `uniroot`. This finds the maximum
alpha-level for which an efficacy bound is crossed, completely ignoring
any futility bound.

## References

Jennison C and Turnbull BW (2000), *Group Sequential Methods with
Applications to Clinical Trials*. Boca Raton: Chapman and Hall.

Liu, Qing, and Keaven M. Anderson. "On adaptive extensions of group
sequential trials for clinical investigations." *Journal of the American
Statistical Association* 103.484 (2008): 1621-1630.

Maurer, Willi, and Frank Bretz. "Multiple testing in group sequential
trials using graphical approaches." *Statistics in Biopharmaceutical
Research* 5.4 (2013): 311-320.;

## Author

Keaven Anderson

## Examples

``` r
# Derive Group Sequential Design 
x <- gsSurv(k = 4, alpha = 0.025, beta = 0.1, timing = c(.5,.65,.8), sfu = sfLDOF,
            sfl = sfHSD, sflpar = 2, lambdaC = log(2)/6, hr = 0.6,
            eta = 0.01 , gamma = c(2.5,5,7.5,10), R = c( 2,2,2,6 ),
            T = 30 , minfup = 18)
x$n.I
#> [1] 109.2757 142.0585 174.8412 218.5515
# Analysis at IA2
sequentialPValue(gsD=x,n.I=c(100,160),Z=c(1.5,2))
#> [1] 0.05363369
# Use planned spending instead of information fraction; do final analysis
sequentialPValue(gsD=x,n.I=c(100,160,190,230),Z=c(1.5,2,2.5,3),usTime=x$timing)
#> [1] 0.001452684
# Check bounds for updated design to verify at least one was crossed
xupdate <- gsDesign(maxn.IPlan=max(x$n.I),n.I=c(100,160,190,230),usTime=x$timing,
                    delta=x$delta,delta1=x$delta1,k=4,alpha=x$alpha,test.type=1,
                    sfu=x$upper$sf,sfupar=x$upper$param)
```
